There is a grant of $734,000 from the Mellon Foundation for us in the AHA to launch this prize program.
It will be a prize competition for the best dissertations.
The prize is $20,000, which should be used for converting the raw dissertation into a high-quality electronic book.
And there is also a subsidy given to the Columbia University Press to develop its infrastructure for producing these books.
Now, this isn't going to solve everything, but we hope it will provide a model for high-quality electronic publishing and will show that scholars can gain some control over this new medium.
good enough to the American Council of Learning Societies that they, and they were working on the same set of problems, that they said, well, we're going to develop a program for mature scholars to do e-books.
And they are now in the last stages of perfecting that proposal, which is also going to the Mellon Foundation,
But what they need is someone to write the damn thing.
So they pointed a finger at me.
Since I was, you know, asked my advice along the way.
Since you're the troublemaker, right?
I'm teasing.
And they said, you do one.
You should.
And then I thought about it.
And I thought, you know, if I did such a book, I could get across the richness of the material in these 50,000 letters in Switzerland and whatever it is, 20,000 more I've read in Paris.
I couldn't print them all or put them all online.
That's too big a job.
But I could get across the full richness of the documentary base for the argument I'm trying to make.
And I can do that by creating a new kind of book.
So that's what I'm now doing.
Do you have a provisional title for this?
No, I don't.
I've tried various titles, but somewhere I want to get the idea of an electronic book about books in the Age of Enlightenment.
Wow.
When are you projecting publication?
When?
Yeah.
Well, maybe, if I'm lucky, three years from now.
Oh.
Because I've read all the archives, but after writing two full-scale books on this, I plan to do a trilogy.
And I wrote the first two volumes, one in the Encyclopédie, and the other in the Forbidden Books of Pre-Revolutionary France.
But that left the bulk of the material untreated.
And at that point, I said, are you going to spend the rest of your life as a chronicler of the Société d'Antiquité, really what you just said to me?
And I thought, life is short.
I want to try out some other things.
I let my index cards sit in drawers.
I have thousands of them for many years, thinking I would write volume three when I retired.
And that was my plan until the people at the ACLS said, we really need someone to try to do one of these electronic books.
And then when I thought about it, I realized, I think I realized, I may be wrong, that
My subject lends itself perfectly to this kind of electronic book.
I described it.
I think I mentioned this in the piece.
You did.
It's a pyramid structure, the top layer, being the main narrative that will come out simultaneously as a normal codex.
But then there will be a series of layers underneath that in which I will have many monographs and documents and historiographical discussions and all kinds of things that will, I hope, do justice to the
This is just so perfect for this chapter that I'm writing.
I won't bore you with the details, but I just can't tell you how this works into precisely what I'm trying to do here.
What is the chapter?
Well, this is the concluding chapter of my book, and making an accommodation with the future.
Well, that's it.
You just told me precisely...
what you're doing.
I think it was Dr. Billington who made this comparison.
It may not have been, but it was somebody whose opinion I really trust and respect.
But this person suggested that what the electronic book might actually be doing is to freeing the printed book to really achieve its destiny, its greatness.
And he made the comparison, you know, when the
when the camera was, the daguerreotype was invented in 1839, I mean, there were fears were rampant among the painters, the artists of the day, that this was the end, you know, that they would be put out of business.
And what it actually did was allow them to explore new areas.
And I don't know, maybe it's too simple a parallel, but I wonder, you know, what you think about that.
I like the parallel.
I think it's illuminating.
No parallels exactly fit anything else, but
I think that is, in fact, exactly the case.
So that it's quite wrong to imagine a fight to the death between the printed book and the electronic book.
It seems to me they are complementary, and that the electronic book is going to open up new possibilities for the printed book, even new ways of reading.
So I think what I imagine the reader of my future e-book
doing will be to, let us say, read horizontally through the standard narrative from one chapter to the next until he or she comes upon something that intrigues him or her and then clicks onto a link to a level below that.
So let us say he comes upon book smuggling.
It's a wonderful subject.
We know next to nothing about smuggling in general, not to say nothing about book smuggling.
And I could go on and on about it, but the point is I will try to press into one chapter an account of book smuggling during the 20 years before the French Revolution.
But there are hundreds and hundreds of letters of book smugglers in these archives in Switzerland and in other letters in Paris by the police when they catch one of them.
and so on.
You know, you can reconstruct the roots and economics of it, and the kind of cannon-mouse game played by police and professionals, et cetera.
So if you're interested in that subject, you click down a link, and then I will write a mini monograph of the technique of book smuggling in Dion, which is peculiarly interesting and special worth discussing.
as opposed to the technique of distance distribution across trade routes to Versailles, which I mentioned earlier.
Versailles is a warehouse.
That's another mini-monogram for Versailles and this woman, Madame Lanoue, that I mentioned.
So there will be a series of mini-monographs.
Maybe each one will be perhaps ten, perhaps pages, perhaps more.
And if the reader is even more intrigued by, let's say, Versailles as a warehouse, the reader can click down yet to another level and read all the letters of Madame Lalou.
And you could even click below that to perhaps other monographs on smuggling or the historiographical
question about the relative importance of the illegal and legal book trade as discussed by other authors.
So you can imagine vertical reading that would accompany horizontal reading.
Or the reader can make his own book.
And in fact, as you know from the research you've done yourself, you can download chunks of a book like this.
and print them out and even have them bound so that you create your own paperback volume.
Exactly.
And, you know, it could be quite different from the paperback top level that I will write because it will be something peculiar to your interests.
So this will, I think, free the book in a way that goes quite parallel.
That's great.
I don't want to overstay my welcome, but I do want to ask you a question.
I'm also doing a chapter on what I call the emigre libraries, and it's an extension of the national libraries, but repositories as expressions of national culture and also the destruction of libraries.
as a means of destroying a people and using as an example Sarajevo or the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and Cornell's subsequent attempt to reseed their collections because they have the finest collection of Southeast Asian.
This is where digital stuff can be very useful, by the way, of course.
where the Khmer Rouge destroyed all of the library collections and every vestige of their literature.
Cornell, now with the new government, has been digitizing stuff and sending it back to Cambodia.
Very interesting.
So I'm writing about that, and I'm writing about Sarajevo.
But I'm also interested in an interview I did with Vartan Gregori, and he mentioned
that when there was no Poland, for instance, during the period of the partition, the de facto National Library was the Bibliothèque Polonaise in Paris.
And you did a wonderful essay in 1981 in the New York Review, and Poland rewrites history.
And you write there about Poland as a country as obsessed with its past as it is worried about its present.
And I just wonder,
Is it a stretch to say that a good deal of the preservation of Polish culture and history was affected by this particular library?
Also, there was another library in St.
Petersburg, for instance, but by these what we might call emigre libraries.
I don't think it's a stretch.
I couldn't prove it, not being a specialist in Polish history, but it seems to me that Poland existed in the minds of Poles and others
after the last of the partitions.
And that had to carry it through until it was recreated after World War I. It existed in its music, too, of course.
Of course.
And its religion as well, as you point out.
Yes.
But I think the book was absolutely central to this.
And where did the book exist?
Well, in libraries.
Also in publishing houses.
And I think something similar happened in a way not exactly the same way after World War II, because you got these reviews devoted to Polish culture, literature, and politics outside of Poland, notably in Paris, that became central rallying points for a
kind of Polish culture that had been repressed by the communist regime.
So the emigre presses, I think, kept alive the rival version of the nation, so to speak, when the nation continued to exist, but as a kind of occupied power.
So I think that the role of emigre libraries, emigre reviews, and literature in general, in the case of Poland, was absolutely
Absolutely crucial.
Now, in the case of Cambodia, I didn't know this, I must admit.
How extensive was the destruction?
Oh, almost total.
Because it was mindful destruction.
I mean, it was not one of the peripheral casualties of war.
I mean, their whole policy was this is the year zero.
And it wasn't just destroying the libraries.
It was killing the librarians and anyone who had this documentation for this.
They would look at you, and if you had these little depressions on your nose, it was evidence that you had reading glasses and that you could read, you know, and you were executed.
So, I mean, it was a quite horribly systematic thing.
I've documented it as much as I can, but mainly to try and profile what Cornell did previously.
And then, of course, I have the Sarajevo, the deliberate destruction of that library, 1.2 million books in one night, which is more than Hitler did in his best day.
He never did that many books in one day.
And then the attempt by the Harvard people to what they call this ingathering, trying to find scholars such as yourself who may have, say, done some work there and made some Xerox copies of things, and maybe they can
So that's a very interesting story, but they'll never replicate it.
Are there estimates about the number of books destroyed?
Cambodia or the number of libraries?
I have no idea.
There was the National Library.
The contents of that were totally destroyed.
The records.
I mean, they evacuated Phnom Penh.
And then they just said about... I could email this.
Did you do email some stuff that I found on this?
I'd be very interested just to have some basic information about it.
Yeah.
Well, if you'd like, I could send you the fragment of the chapter that I've written.
That might even be the best thing.
Yeah.
It's very simple.
It's just darntonatprinceton.edu.
Okay.
Darntonatprinceton.edu.
Yep.
Good.
Well, why don't I do that?
That way you'll... By the way, I described my...
fantasy of writing an e-book of this sort, which is no longer a fantasy because I've started, and an article in the Chronicle of Higher Education.
Okay, and I have access.
How recent was that?
It was quite recent.
It was maybe two months ago.
Okay, good.
I have access to that on the web, so I can.
You might find, I mean, there's described as notion of levels and so on.
I now have actually a team of graduate students.
five of them who are going to be transcribing Xerox manuscript and working with me.
So it'll be a team effort, not at the top basic narrative, which will be the published codex version of things, but the various levels beneath that, I hope, well, that can only be done with the help of other people.
Yeah.
I'll go check that out.
I do have the Chronicle.
I have one other question to ask you because I know it's kept you for a long time.
In your PW interview, you have a wonderful quote in there.
You have fantasies about books all the time.
I love that quotation.
I wonder if you could just briefly expand on what you meant by that.
I have fantasies towards the end of the piece.
I'll have to find it here now.
I've just written it down in my notes here.
Well, I forget, it's no big deal, but it just was kind of a nice... Well, maybe it's... Yeah, I think most authors do spend a lot of time daydreaming about the books they're going to write.
Is it along those lines?
Because I have... I constantly think of why I do the A, and that I could be shape A, and this much better to do B, and so on.
Okay, I've got it here by the way.
So let's just see.
This was in 1995.
You know, we talk about computers are great.
I have a LexisNexis account, you know, and I can just search.
It's amazing the things that you can find, you know.
Where, where, where, where?
I have fantasies about books all the time, Darnton says, about his desire to investigate many subjects.
I would like to write a book about the way people use sex to make sense of life, but I probably never will.
Sex has become a way to explore pleasure and morality.
It is often a vehicle for understanding other things.
citing the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, who says, people think with things, doubt and suggest philosophers and academics think with abstractions, ordinary people use the world about them, objects, stories, and popular motifs, and combine them in a way to make sense of life.
I don't know if that really pertains to fantasies, but it's a great quote.
But that was the context.
Well, of course, you should feel
Yeah, and I really haven't asked you questions about other things because I have the books and no sense in replicating what you've done elsewhere, but I really did want to get into these other things.
I'll be happy to email you that little piece, that little fragment on Cambodia.
It's about 3,000 words, I think, and...
I have to talk with some librarians, I think next week or something like that, so if I can edify them with some of the information you've got up.
Well, would you like to see the Sarajevo thing too?
Well, I'll settle for the Khmer Rouge.
Okay.
I have so few minutes.
Okay, good.
But it's part of the appeal to librarians to not think that they can just digitize the world away.
buying digitizing with respect for the preservation of the book as a physical author.
Yeah.
Because without that, book history is impossible.
I think you'll find this pretty interesting, so I'd be delighted to send it on to you.
Yeah, thanks.
I'm most grateful.
Well, I'm grateful for the time.
It's a wonderful book you're doing.
I can't wait to read it.
Thank you.
Well, I'm going to finish it this summer, the Lord willing, and I'm changing publishers as we speak.
Who's your new publisher?
Well, I haven't moved yet, but I'm going over to Viking, I believe.
I've been orphaned a couple of times with editors leaving, and it's awfully depressing to have to start explaining what you're doing over again.
I'm with Holt, and we did very well with my first book, I must say.
It's still in print, and the paperback just came out.
I'm going to shut off the tape recorder now.